.Dd April 7, 2026
.Dt GIT-CREATE-WORKTREE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm git-create-worktree
.Nd create a Git worktree with interactive or CLI flow
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl B Ar base
.Op Fl C
.Op Fl d Ar dir
.Op Sy \-\-no-color
.Op Ar branch
.Op Ar path
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs
.Xr git-worktree 1
to add a worktree for
.Ar branch .
If the branch already exists locally, it is checked out; otherwise a new branch is created from
.Fl B
(or
.Sy HEAD
in non-interactive mode).
.Pp
With no
.Ar branch
and a TTY, the script prompts for branch name, base ref, worktree path, and whether to set upstream on
.Sy origin .
Without a TTY, a branch is required.
.Pp
The script
.Xr cd 1
into the new worktree before installing dependencies; that only affects the script process, not your interactive shell when you run
.Nm
from the terminal.
If
.Pa package.json
exists, dependencies are installed using
.Xr pnpm 1 ,
.Xr yarn 1 ,
.Xr bun 1 ,
or
.Xr npm 1
based on lockfiles.
.Pp
Output and prompts use
.Lk https://github.com/charmbracelet/gum charmbracelet/gum .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Sy \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.It Fl v , Sy \-\-verbose
Enable shell trace
.Pq Xr bash 1 Ic set Fl x .
.It Fl B Ar base , Sy \-\-base Ar base
Ref to use when creating a new branch.
Default is
.Sy HEAD ;
in interactive mode, the default base shown is the current branch when that would otherwise be
.Sy HEAD .
.It Fl C , Sy \-\-create-upstream
After the worktree exists, create the branch on
.Sy origin
if missing, or set upstream to
.Sy origin/ Ns Ar branch .
.It Fl d Ar dir , Sy \-\-worktree-dir Ar dir
Parent directory name used when deriving the default worktree path
.Po default
.Pa .worktrees
.Pc .
Path components are passed through internal slugification (see
.Sx PATH SLUGIFICATION ) .
.It Sy \-\-no-color
Set
.Ev NO_COLOR
to disable color in
.Nm gum .
.It Ar branch
Branch to create or check out.
.It Ar path
Filesystem path for the worktree.
If omitted, the default path is the parent from
.Fl d ,
a path separator, and a slug derived from
.Ar branch .
If
.Ar path
is given, the basename is slugified and combined with the dirname as provided.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width NO_COLOR
.It Ev NO_COLOR
When non-empty (including via
.Sy \-\-no-color ) ,
disables color in gum output.
.El
.Sh PATH SLUGIFICATION
Branch and path components are transliterated to ASCII, non-alphanumeric runs become hyphens, and names are lowercased.
Leading dots on components are preserved
.Pq e.g. .Pa .worktrees .
.Sy \&.
and
.Sy ..
components are kept for path structure.
Invalid patterns involving
.Sy ..
are rejected.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The utility exits 0 on success, and
.Ql >0
if
.Nm gum
is missing, an unknown option is given, too many arguments are passed, stdin is non-TTY with no branch, slugification fails, or a git or install command fails.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Li git\ create-worktree
Interactive prompts
.Pq TTY required .
.It Li git\ create-worktree boneskull/my-feature
New or existing branch; default path under
.Pa .worktrees/ .
.It Li git\ create-worktree Fl d Ar worktrees Li feat/gnarly-stuff
Use
.Pa worktrees/
as the parent for the default path.
.It Li git\ create-worktree Li my-branch Li my-custom-path
Explicit worktree path; basename is slugified.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr git 1 ,
.Xr git-worktree 1 ,
.Xr gum 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Christopher M. Hiller Aq Mt boneskull@boneskull.com .
.Pp
Originally derived from Nick Nisi's dotfiles; adapted for gum and local conventions.
